# Kubernetes Project Maintainership

Kubernetes is a big project with many contributors, the project organization is
a daunting task and the project maintainers are the members that are trusted
with that task, driving the project, improving the health of the project,
performing quality control and being responsible over one or more components in
the project. A Kubernetes maintainer is a contributor who has contributed/is
contributing to the project regularly and a developer that demonstrated good
technical judgement. The following is a list of requirements to be a Kubernetes
maintainer.

Before continuing, it should be noted that we value every contributions, however
small it may be, even a comment on an issue a valuable contribution to us.
Maintainership requires time commitment and community trust. You don't have to
be a maintainer to have a meaningful impact on Kubernetes!

## How to become a maintainer

### 1. Be an active contributor

An active contributor is someone who contributed regularly in the last 2 months
and is one of the top 20 of contributors for the last 2 months.

For example in the context of merged commit contributions, from September to
November, the 20th developer has 20 commits.

#### Contribution Types

Contributions are not limited to code. Other contributions include PR reviews,
discussion participations, test ownership, SIG leadership, etc. At the moment we
are only able to measure PR contributions. As we improve our project tooling,
we'll be able to measure and analyze other types of contributions and take those
into account when evaluating a maintainer application.

### 2. Be experienced in the project

You need to have more than 50 contributions total and project participation for
more than a year in the Kubernetes organization.

### 3. Find 3 senior maintainer sponsors

As you contribute to Kubernetes, you'll be collaborating with different
community members. Having the approval of senior project maintainers means that
they have seen your work and they believe that you'll be a good addition to the
project. 

**Motivation:** We want the sponsorships to be meaningful, so we require the sponsors to be
maintainers that collaborated with you and we also don't want to burden the
senior maintainers otherwise they'll be reluctant to sponsor anyone. Therefore,
rather than having a mentorship process where a new maintainer is guided by a
senior member, we want to see the capabilities of the candidate before being
accepted.

**TODO:** Detail the meaning of a senior project maintainer with a requirement
along the lines of more than 6 months experience as a project maintainer.

### 4. Apply for maintainership to contributor leads

The application will be discussed by the lead maintainers and put to vote. If
the vote result is negative, do not be discouraged! You will be given feedback
so that you can improve yourself and apply again. We want to empower our
community and cultivate a trust relationship that's why we carefully evaluate
abilities and experience of each candidate.

**TBD:** As of now Brian Grant is the wg-contribex lead that approves new maintainers.

## What we expect from our maintainers

First and foremost, be a good person, as cheeky as it sounds, you are now a
member of the Kubernetes project and thus represent the project and your fellow
developers. We value our community tremendously and we'd like to keep
cultivating a friendly and collaborative environment for our
members/contributors/users. For more,
see
[Kubernetes Code of Conduct](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/docs/devel/community-expectations.md).

Good technical judgement, and knowledge over one or more components of
Kubernetes, it might be a project under the Kubernetes or it might be a
package/component in the main repository such as the Kubernetes documentation.
We determine the maintainer applicant's judgement via the sponsorship
requirement. For example, a senior maintainer might decide to sponsor an applicant
after they witnessed the applicants good technical judgement during a design
discussion, a feature implementation or by simply witnessing the way they
interact with other contributors.

## Inactive Maintainers

Maintainers deemed inactive after being inactive for 30 days in the project or
maintainers that decide to step down will be retired. Retired maintainers might
decide to come back to the project at a later point. This means that if an
retired maintainer wants to return, he will be able to regain his access once he
becomes an active contributor again.

**Motivation:** Since maintainers have already proved themselves by becoming a
maintainer in the first place, we only require that the maintainer familiarizes
himself with the project again by becoming an active contributor again.
Kubernetes as a project is evolving very fast and it requires some time to get
used to the project changes whether it is around contributor tooling, project
structure or the codebase itself.

**TBD**: The inactivity period (30 days) is subject to change.
